PRIORITY_UPDATE can be used for initial priority, split H3 frames into two types (#1167)
httpwg/http-extensions: draft-ietf-httpbis-priority.md

cacheability or the applicability of the cached response, by using header fields
that control the caching behavior (e.g., Cache-Control, Vary).

# Signalling Initial Priority in Frames

Endpoints might prefer to signal the initial priority of a response using a
frame rather than a header field. This document specifies a new PRIORITY_UPDATE
frame for HTTP/2 ({{!RFC7540}}) and HTTP/3 ({{!I-D.ietf-quic-http}}). It carries
priority parameters and references the target of the prioritization based on a
version-specific identifier; in HTTP/2 this is the Stream ID, in HTTP/3 this is

> either the Stream ID or Push ID.

Reviewer: How about stating that endpoints that do not want to expose an end-to-end signal MAY omit the header field, but send the PRIORITY_UPDATE frame at an early moment assuming that it would reach the server as early as the request headers? Would could go on to explain that in such case, all the responses that the server would send would have the priority in the frame being applied.

The benefit of phrasing that way is that we can get rid of the last paragraph of this section.

Author: I've tried to incorporate this suggestion in https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/pull/1167/commits/f5ac92a045a3074e503c93d304a90799e387ab07 but found it trickier to write than I first thought it would be, so it ended up a little different in the end. Please take a look and add some further suggestions if I'm not hitting your mark.

In HTTP/2 the frame is sent on stream zero and in HTTP/3 it is sent on the client
control stream ({{!I-D.ietf-quic-http}}, Section 6.2.1). This allows the
PRIORITY_UPDATE to be sent before the stream it references is created, and
avoids having to extend the protocol semantics to support continued updates
during the stream lifetime; see {{reprioritization}}.

Unlike the header field, the PRIORITY_UPDATE frame is a hop-by-hop signal.

> Having two format to carry the initial priority signal brings the dilemma of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Having two mechanisms to carry the initial priority signal brings the dilemma of
```

Reviewer 3: +1

cacheability or the applicability of the cached response, by using header fields
that control the caching behavior (e.g., Cache-Control, Vary).

# Signalling Initial Priority in Frames

This document specifies a new PRIORITY_UPDATE frame for HTTP/2 ({{!RFC7540}})
and HTTP/3 ({{!I-D.ietf-quic-http}}). It carries priority parameters and
references the target of the prioritization based on a version-specific
identifier; in HTTP/2 this is the Stream ID, in HTTP/3 this is either the Stream
ID or Push ID.

PRIORITY_UPDATE can be sent by clients on the control stream. This allows the
PRIORITY_UPDATE to be sent before the stream it references is created, and
avoids having to extend the protocol semantics to support continued updates
during the stream lifetime; see {{reprioritization}}.

Unlike the Priority header field, the PRIORITY_UPDATE frame is a hop-by-hop

> signal. Clients that do not want to expose an end-to-end signal MAY omit the

Reviewer 4: I just have to say that this "do not want" statement assumes a great deal without a whole lot of support.

Author: paging @kazuho who suggested this text

Author: should be fixed in https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/pull/1167/commits/ca71a499138f646c99fc1c57a72277f2db4fc1e0

header field but send the PRIORITY_UPDATE frame at an early moment assuming that

> it will reach the server as early as the request message it applies to. The

Reviewer 4: The important "when" here is "before prioritization information is not useful to the server".  That might be later than when the server receives the request.

endpoint that receives both signals can process them in any way it chooses but

> MUST NOT treat this as error.

Reviewer: How about changing the last sentence to something like: _The signal carried by a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame overrides that carried by the header, even when the frame was received before the request headers._

Note that this PR recommends such a behavior; it states that a server SHOULD buffer and apply the content of PRIORITY_UPDATE frame that precedes the header field. For good reasons.

Consider the case of an H3 client sending a HTTP request with a Priority header field, then changing its mind and sending a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame. As H3 does not guarantee delivery order across streams, the server might receive the frame before the header. I'd assume that we'd want servers to apply the value carried by the frame. Even when the protocol is H2, I am not sure if all the H2 stacks have the guarantee that the information across multiple streams are sent in the order they are issued, or that they are provided to the application in the order they are received.

browser would send a reprioritization frame with the priority field value
set to `u=0`.

This document specifies a new PRIORITY_UPDATE frame for HTTP/2 ({{!RFC7540}})
and HTTP/3 ({{!I-D.ietf-quic-http}}). It carries priority parameters and
references the target of the prioritization based on a version-specific
identifier; in HTTP/2 this is the Stream ID, in HTTP/3 this is either the Stream
ID or Push ID. Unlike the Priority header field, the PRIORITY_UPDATE frame is a
hop-by-hop signal.

PRIORITY_UPDATE frames are sent by clients on the control stream, and therefore
can be sent even after the send-side of the request stream is being closed. This
also allows the PRIORITY_UPDATE frame to be sent as early as the stream it
references is created. Depending on the transmission logic of the endpoints and
on the network condition in case of HTTP/3, servers might receive a
PRIORITY_UPDATE frame that references a request stream that is yet to be opened.

> Furthermore, clients might omit the priority request header, using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, clients might omit the priority request header field, using
```

PRIORITY_UPDATE frames to indicate both the initial priority and the updated
priority.

When a server receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame referring to a client-initiated
request that is yet to be opened, the server buffers the priorities being

> carried by the received frame and applies them once the request is being opened.

Author: I agree that "is being opened" is ugly. However, I think substituting it for arrives in touching on https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/issues/1260

For consistency with other text in this PR, how about I use "processed" here and we can change it again in the resolution to #1260?

> carried by the received frame and applies them once the request is being opened.

Reviewer 5: WFM.

The signal carried by a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame overrides that carried by the

> header, even when the frame was received before the request headers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
header field, even when the frame was received before the request headers.
```

transitions to a state that prevents the client from sending additional frames
on the stream. Therefore, a client cannot reprioritize a response by sending
additional metadata (e.g., trailer fields) or a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame on the
request stream. We avoid interoperability failure by restricting PRIORITY_UPDATE
frames to the control stream, with each such frame explicitly identifying the
response to which the new priority applies.

## HTTP/2 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame {#h2-update-frame}

The HTTP/2 PRIORITY_UPDATE frame (type=0xF) is used by clients to signal the
initial priority of a response, or to reprioritize a response or push stream. It
carries the stream ID of the response and the priority in ASCII text, using the
same representation as that of the Priority header field value.

The Stream Identifier field ({{!RFC7540}}, Section 4.1) in the PRIORITY_UPDATE
frame header MUST be zero (0x0). Receiving a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame with a field
of any other value MUST be treated as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

~~~ drawing
HTTP/2 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame {
  Length (24),
  Type (8) = 0xF,
  Flags (8),
  Reserved (1),

>   Stream Identifier (31),

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Stream Identifier (31) = 0,
```

  R (1),
  Prioritized Stream ID (31),
  Priority Field Value (..),
}
~~~

> {: #fig-h2-reprioritization-frame title="HTTP/2 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame"}

Reviewer: Seeing the definition of the frame _headers_ for H2 was surprising to me, though I understand that it reflects the change to the HTTP/3 draft. Maybe I should ask if the change in HTTP/3 is a good thing.

Author: As a personal opinion I prefer to see the frame in whole because it avoids having to cross reference to the frame headers, which are defined in some other document. 

But I can drop them if people want. I see that as an editorial change so perhaps we can avoid blocking this and fix up later if needs be.

Reviewer: I agree that this is an editorial issue, and that we need to ask the WG to resolve (because it is about the convention covering all H2 extensions, not just this one).

Reviewer 5: FWIW, ALTSVC is the only extension to have reached RFC status previously.  It [does not include](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7838#section-4) the frame header; only the payload.

Author: You forgot ORIGIN frame https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8336#section-2.1 which also specifies the frame payload.

Now that H2 and H3 have different frame format definitions, I think extensions applicable to both will hit this problem. I'd like to figure what people think is the most acceptable way to present things.

Author: One option would be to write documents that update RFC 7838 and RFC 8336 to use the new format and define the H3 frame at the same time...

Reviewer 5: True, I try to block that one out.

They have different frame format definitions, sure; the question is whether the payload needs to vary between H2/H3.  I think the real things you need to specify are:

- What stream it's on (part of the header in H2, intrinsic property in H3)
  - Control stream vs. stream zero language plays into this
- Flags if used in H2; since H3 doesn't have flags, this might lead to a payload difference
- Payload

The simplest path for dual-version extensions is not to use flags and only define the payload.

Author: Taking the feedback received here and elsewhere, I'm reverted the diagram back to our traditional format.

frames on the stream. Therefore, a client cannot reprioritize a response by
using the Priority header field.  Modifying this behavior would require a
semantic change to the protocol, but this is avoided by restricting the

> stream on which a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame can be sent.

Reviewer 3: Should be more like

```
  Therefore, a client cannot reprioritize a response by
  sending additional metadata (e.g., trailer fields) on the request stream.
  We avoid interoperability failure by restricting PRIORITY_UPDATE
  frames to the control stream, with each such frame explicitly identifying
  the stream to which the new priority applies.
```

Author: Thanks. I tweaked the suggestion slightly and made cbcdc60cf5a92. PTAL.

## HTTP/2 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame {#h2-update-frame}

The HTTP/2 PRIORITY_UPDATE frame (type=0xF) is used by clients to signal the
initial priority of a response, or to reprioritize a response or push stream. It
carries the stream ID of the response and the priority in ASCII text, using the
same representation as that of the Priority header field value.

The Stream Identifier field ({{!RFC7540}}, Section 4.1) in the PRIORITY_UPDATE
frame header MUST be zero (0x0). Receiving a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame with a field

> of any other value MUST be treated as a connection error of type
> PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of any other value MUST be treated as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.
```

Priority Field Value:
: The priority update value in ASCII text, encoded using Structured Headers.

The PRIORITY_UPDATE frame MAY be sent before the stream that it references has

> been created. The Stream ID MUST be within the stream limit. If a server

Author: This is an important observation, thanks for catching it. I think this is a side effect of applying H3's rules naively rather than an intentional action. I'm open to phrasing this differently but I fear that the scope of the problem is actually a bit large. We probably need a little bit more thought about what it means to receive PRIORITY_UPDATES for H2 idle or closed streams. Especially given the amount of text RFC 7540 spends on describing this.

Perhaps the best action is to excise the entirety of this paragraph and create an issue to track this?

> been created. The Stream ID MUST be within the stream limit. If a server

Reviewer 5: I'd also be okay keeping it, provided there's an issue to figure out the right language in 7540-land.

> been created. The Stream ID MUST be within the stream limit. If a server

Reviewer 5: Split out as #1261.

> been created. The Stream ID MUST be within the stream limit. If a server

Author: thanks! In that case I'm intending to keep the text

receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE for a Stream ID that is beyond the stream limits,
this SHOULD be treated as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.
PRIORITY_UPDATE frames received before the request or response has started
SHOULD be buffered until the stream is opened and applied immediately after the

> request message has been processed. Holding PRIORITY_UPDATES consumes extra

Reviewer: ```suggestion
request message has been processed. Holding PRIORITY_UPDATEs consumes extra
```

extra state on the peer, although the size of the state is bounded by stream
limits. There is no bound on the number of PRIORITY_UPDATE frames that can be
sent, so an endpoint SHOULD store only the most recently received frame.

If a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame is received with a Stream ID of 0x0, the recipient

> MUST respond with a connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Author: Yes. I spotted this when used the HTTP/3 format to describe the full HTTP/2 frame (not just the payload). In that version I called it Prioritized Stream ID to avoid the ambiguation. I'd lost that change by reverting. Thanks for spotting it.

  Length (i),
  Prioritized Element ID (i),
  Priority Field Value (..),
}
~~~
{: #fig-h3-reprioritization-frame title="HTTP/3 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame"}

The PRIORITY_UPDATE frame payload has the following fields:

Prioritized Element ID:
: The stream ID or push ID that is the target of the priority update.

Priority Field Value:
: The priority update value in ASCII text, encoded using Structured Headers.

The request-stream variant of PRIORITY_UPDATE (type=0xF0700) MUST reference a
request stream. If a server receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE (type=0xF0700) for a
Stream ID that is not a request stream, this MUST be treated as a connection
error of type H3_ID_ERROR. PRIORITY_UPDATE (type=0xF0700) MAY be sent before the
request stream that it references has been created. The Stream ID MUST be within
the client-initiated bidirectional stream limit. If a server receives a
PRIORITY_UPDATE (type=0xF0700) with a Stream ID that is beyond the stream
limits, this SHOULD be treated as a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR.

Request-stream variant PRIORITY_UPDATEs (type=0xF0700) received before the
request or response has started SHOULD be buffered until the stream is opened

> and applied immediately after the request message has been processed. Holding

Reviewer: This is about existing text, and we can defer the decision, but I think it might be better to say "SHOULD be buffered and be applied once the stream is opened."

The problem with current text is that it does deal with servers sending responses _while_ they receive requests (i.e. early response).

Author: Agreed that is better.

Author: At first I agrred but I've thought about a downside. So I've created https://github.com/httpwg/http-extensions/issues/1260 where we can discuss separately.

PRIORITY_UPDATE frames consumes extra state on the peer, although the size of
the state is bounded by bidirectional stream limits. There is no bound on the
number of PRIORITY_UPDATE frames that can be sent, so an endpoint SHOULD store
only the most recently received frame.

The push-stream variant PRIORITY_UPDATE (type=0xF0701) MUST reference a promised

> push stream. If a server receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE (type=0xF0701) with Push ID
> that is beyond the push limit or has not been promised, this MUST be treated as
> a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
push stream. If a server receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE (type=0xF0701) with a Push ID
that is greater than the maximum Push ID or which has not yet been promised, this
MUST be treated as a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR.
```

> PRIORITY_UPDATE frames of either type are only sent by a client. If a client

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
PRIORITY_UPDATE frames of either type are only sent by clients. If a client
```

Priority Field Value:
: The priority update value in ASCII text, encoded using Structured Headers.

The PRIORITY_UPDATE frame MAY be sent before the stream that it references has
been created. The Stream ID MUST be within the stream limit. If a server
receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE for a Stream ID that is beyond the stream limits,
this SHOULD be treated as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.
PRIORITY_UPDATE frames received before the request or response has started
SHOULD be buffered until the stream is opened and applied immediately after the
request message has been processed. Holding PRIORITY_UPDATES consumes extra
state on the peer, although the size of the state is bounded by stream limits.
There is no bound on the number of PRIORITY_UPDATEs that can be sent, so an
endpoint SHOULD store only the most recently received frame.

If a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame is received with a Prioritized Stream ID of 0x0, the
recipient MUST respond with a connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

If a client receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame, it MUST respond with a connection
error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

## HTTP/3 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame {#h3-update-frame}

> The HTTP/3 PRIORITY_UPDATE frame (type=0x1CCB8BBF1F0700 or 0x1CCB8BBF1F0701) is

Reviewer 6: Is it 0x1CCB8BBF1F0700/0x1CCB8BBF1F0701 or 0x10/0x11?

Author: In HTTP/3, the value should be the long 0x1CCB8BBF1F0700/0x1CCB8BBF1F0701, I'll fix this up.

Priority Field Value:
: The priority update value in ASCII text, encoded using Structured Headers.

The PRIORITY_UPDATE frame MAY be sent before the stream that it references has
been created. The Stream ID MUST be within the stream limit. If a server
receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE for a Stream ID that is beyond the stream limits,

> this MUST be treated as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

Reviewer 4: SHOULD.  I don't think that I could guarantee that this could be enforced.

```suggestion
this SHOULD be treated as a connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.
```

Well, I guess that this is the h2 variant, but still.

PRIORITY_UPDATE frames received before the request or response has started
SHOULD be buffered until the stream is opened and applied immediately after the
request message has been processed. Holding PRIORITY_UPDATES consumes extra
state on the peer, although the size of the state is bounded by stream limits.
There is no bound on the number of PRIORITY_UPDATEs that can be sent, so an
endpoint SHOULD store only the most recently received frame.

If a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame is received with a Prioritized Stream ID of 0x0, the
recipient MUST respond with a connection error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

If a client receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame, it MUST respond with a connection
error of type PROTOCOL_ERROR.

## HTTP/3 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame {#h3-update-frame}

The HTTP/3 PRIORITY_UPDATE frame (type=0xF or 0x10) is used by clients to
signal the initial priority of a response, or to reprioritize a response or push
stream. It carries the identifer of the element that is being prioritized, and
the updated priority in ASCII text, using the same representation as that of the
Priority header field value. PRIORITY_UPDATE with a frame type of 0xF is used

> for request streams, PRIORITY_UPDATE with a frame time of 0x11 is used for push

Reviewer: 0x10?

with a frame time of 0x1CCB8BBF1F0701 is used for push streams.

The PRIORITY_UPDATE frame MUST be sent on the client control stream
({{!I-D.ietf-quic-http}}, Section 6.2.1). Receiving a PRIORITY_UPDATE frame on a
stream other than the client control stream MUST be treated as a connection
error of type H3_FRAME_UNEXPECTED.

~~~ drawing
HTTP/3 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame {
  Type (i) = 0x1CCB8BBF1F0700..0x1CCB8BBF1F0701,
  Length (i),
  Prioritized Element ID (i),
  Priority Field Value (..),
}
~~~
{: #fig-h3-reprioritization-frame title="HTTP/3 PRIORITY_UPDATE Frame"}

The PRIORITY_UPDATE frame payload has the following fields:

Prioritized Element ID:
: The stream ID or push ID that is the target of the priority update.

Priority Field Value:
: The priority update value in ASCII text, encoded using Structured Headers.

The PRIORITY_UPDATE frame MAY be sent before the request stream that it
references has been created. The Stream ID MUST be within the client-initiated

> bidirectional stream limit. If a server receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE for a Stream

Reviewer 4: This needs to be qualified; if the frame contains a Push ID, then this doesn't apply.

> ID that is beyond the stream limits, this MUST be treated as a connection error

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ID that is beyond the stream limits, this SHOULD be treated as a connection error
```

of type H3_ID_ERROR. PRIORITY_UPDATE frames received before the request or
response has started SHOULD be buffered until the stream is opened and applied
immediately after the request message has been processed. Holding
PRIORITY_UPDATES consumes extra state on the peer, although the size of the
state is bounded by bidirectional stream limits. There is no bound on the number
of PRIORITY_UPDATEs that can be sent, so an endpoint SHOULD store only the most
recently received frame.

If a server receives a PRIORITY_UPDATE specifying a Push ID that has not been

> promised, it SHOULD be treated as a connection error of type H3_ID_ERROR.

Reviewer 4: This one could be a MUST.

Author: hmm yeah, the current text is actually a bit nasty because it doesn't restrict PRIORITY_UPDATE to be within MAX_PUSH_ID either. Combining those factors means the client has a bit too much sway over the amount of state a server needs to hold. Let me fix both things.

: PRIORITY_UPDATE

Code:

> : 0xF and 0x10

Reviewer 4: I would skip a number here and let people use the low bit of the type as a flag if they want.  Otherwise, this is a tiny bit more awkward.
